What maintainers should know before adopting Packit for downstream release automation (#1004)
packit/packit.dev: docs/fedora-releases-guide/what-to-know.md

---

> title: What maintainers should know before adopting Packit for downstream release automation 

Reviewer: Way too long for the sidebar title

sidebar_position: 5
---
# What maintainers should know before adopting Packit for downstream release automation 

## Responsibilities

Packit is designed to **assist** maintainers, not to **replace** them.

Maintainers retain key responsibilities:
- reviewing and merging Packit-created pull requests
- maintaining package quality
- ensuring updates don't break dependant packages

:::tip `version_update_mask`

The default Packit onboarding configuration enables automated releases only for `rawhide`. 

When extending the automation to branched Fedoras and EPELs, consider using [`version_update_mask`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration#version_update_mask) to prevent introducing breaking changes into stable distributions.

:::

> 

Author: Ideally, I would put here another warning about the **spamming**.
But I am not really sure what the users can do about it?
@lachmanfrantisek do you know what users can do to avoid creating too much spamming?

> :::warning missing notifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning Missing notifications
```

Pull requests, Koji builds and Bodhi updates are created by Packit FAS account, making it the default notification recipient.

To stay informed about Packit-triggered activities in the Fedora ecosystem, [configure notification settings accordingly](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/fedora-notifications).

There is an [open issue](https://github.com/packit/packit-service/issues/2404) for Bodhi update notifications.

> :::

Reviewer 2: wouldn't this fit better in the `Monitoring and observability` section?

> ## Monitoring and observability

Reviewer 2: thinking about it more, I think there is quite an overlap with https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding#ui here, what do you think? I would probably try to avoid the duplication

Author: You are right, there is some overlap however I think that they make sense in both guides. Or we should merge the missing peaces in the old section and link it in the new guide.

For now I link the old UI and notficiations about errors sections in the new guide.

Track *Packit Service* activity through:

> - the pull request updates and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the pull request updates, and 
```

- the [Packit Dashboard](https://dashboard.packit.dev/).

> Packit Service responds to every valid command in pull requests. Missing response indicates:

Reviewer 2: maybe we could link https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding#retriggering here for the commands?

Reviewer 2: ok I see it is linked in the following section, in that case maybe this sentence with the 2 points could be moved there as well?

Author: I meant it as a monitoring indication (you can understand packit is reacting waiting for the response). For this reason I would leave it here. But I linked again all the commands.

Reviewer 2: ok, makes sense!

- Incorrect command syntax
- Packit Service outage

> Check service status at [https://status.packit.dev/](https://status.packit.dev/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check service status at [our status page](https://status.packit.dev/).
```

## Recovery procedures

### Service-based retriggering

Each job configured in `packit.yml` can be retriggered via dist-git pull request comments. See the [complete list of commands](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding#retriggering).

### Manual CLI Operations

During service outages, maintain workflow using Packit CLI:

1. Install [Packit CLI](https://packit.dev/docs/cli)
2. [Configure required tokens](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration#user-configuration-file)
3. Verify setup (if not already working in service):
   - Follow [dist-git onboarding guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding)
   - Validate config with `packit validate-config`

#### Troubleshooting Issues

**Missing pull request for release:**

> Use [`packit pull_from_upstream`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/pull-from-upstream) when [release-monitoring](https://release-monitoring.org/) detects updates but pull requests aren't created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [`packit pull-from-upstream`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/pull-from-upstream) when [release-monitoring](https://release-monitoring.org/) detects updates but pull requests aren't created.
```

**Missing Koji build:**

The release pull request is merged (and contains a change in the version value) but a Koji build isn't triggered.

- Check [`allowed_pr_authors`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/koji_build#optional-parameters)

> - Trigger build manually with [`packit build in-koji`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/build/in-koji)

Reviewer: I would also mention that you need to specify dist-git-branches… or at least in my case, it never works like it should :D

When using Packit CLI to create pull requests, ensure your FAS account is added to the `allowed_pr_authors` list to trigger Koji builds automatically. This enables the expected build workflow for maintainer-created pull requests.

**Missing Bodhi update:**

The Koji build is created but there is no Bodhi update.

- Packit does not create Bodhi updates for `rawhide`, they are automatically created by Bodhi.
- Verify [`allowed_builders`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/bodhi_update#optional-parameters)
- Create manually using [`packit create-update`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/create-update)

For updates on non-rawhide branches, verify your FAS account is included in the `allowed_builders` list. When submitting Koji builds via Packit CLI, automatic Bodhi update creation requires your FAS account to be explicitly authorized in this configuration.

## Customization options

Packit works best with simple package structures:
- Single source
- Single patch

> - Straightforward spec file

Reviewer 2: I am not sure this is accurate, e.g. as for sources, I would say currently, with only remote sources (multiple) Packit works ok out of the box; also not sure what is the exact situation or patches, but I could see some packages having them and Packit working fine. As for the specfiles, "straightforward" might also not be that clear, maybe we could mention concrete issues, like specfile parsing doesn't handle conditions or using some extra macros, @nforro what do you think?

Author: Ok! I took this from the script that was checking the projects suitable to be onboarded.  Are they working fine without custom hooks or actions? As suggested in the following sentence?

Reviewer 3: I don't think there are any problems with sources anymore, condition parsing is not really a concern during sync_release, but even if it was, the long-standing issue in specfile is only about conditions outside of sections or spanning across sections boundaries, which is quite rare. As for downstream patches, I think the situation is still the same - if they have been upstreamed they will fail to apply to new version sources.

Reviewer 2: Ok, thanks for the details, I would then probably sum it e.g. like `Packit works out of the box with the simple package structures (e.g. non-complex spec files), but can be customised for more complicated use cases as well.`

Reviewer 2: @majamassarini oh I see, I think since the script was created, we have changed quite a lot regarding the source handling, so we now support bigger variety of packages.

Reviewer 3: I would maybe change it to `Packit should work out of the box with the simple package structures ...`, just to be on the safe side.

For complex packages, customize Packit using:
- [Actions/hooks](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/actions)
- Reference [configuration examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#examples-for-actions)

> ### `changelogs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Changelogs
```

Why in monospace as for code?

> Customize `changelogs` generation [following these examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#custom-changelog-generation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customize changelog generation [following these examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#custom-changelog-generation)
```

> ### side tags - releasing multiple packages in a single update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sidetags - releasing multiple packages in a single update
```

> [Follow this guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/releasing-multiple-packages) to enable builds in `side-tags`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Follow this guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/releasing-multiple-packages) to enable builds in sidetags.
```

## Ecosystem Awareness

> Before adoption, review similar packages in the same ecosystem for best practices and configuration patterns.

Author: Is it worth making a list of ecosystem and point to an example package for every one of them?
I am not sure I could list many ecosystems. `rust` for sure but I would not know which package to check. And then, python? java? gnome? I don't know.

Reviewer 2: that could be nice, or also linking sourcegraph.com that users can use for easy searching?

- Check [`allowed_pr_authors`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/koji_build#optional-parameters)
- Trigger build manually with [`packit build in-koji`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/build/in-koji) (and specify dist-git branches if needed)

When using Packit CLI to create pull requests, ensure your FAS account is added to the `allowed_pr_authors` list to trigger Koji builds automatically. This enables the expected build workflow for maintainer-created pull requests.

**Missing Bodhi update:**

The Koji build is created but there is no Bodhi update.

- Packit does not create Bodhi updates for `rawhide`, they are automatically created by Bodhi.
- Verify [`allowed_builders`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/bodhi_update#optional-parameters)
- Create manually using [`packit create-update`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/create-update)

For updates on non-rawhide branches, verify your FAS account is included in the `allowed_builders` list. When submitting Koji builds via Packit CLI, automatic Bodhi update creation requires your FAS account to be explicitly authorized in this configuration.

## Customization options

> Packit works best with simple package structures:

Author: ### 
```suggestion
Packit works out of the box with simple package structures:
```
@lbarcziova do you think this is better?

---
title: What maintainers should know before adopting Packit for downstream release automation 
sidebar_position: 5
---
# What maintainers should know before adopting Packit for downstream release automation 

## Responsibilities

> Packit is designed to **assist** maintainers, not **replace** them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Packit is designed to **assist** maintainers, not to **replace** them.
```

Maintainers retain key responsibilities:
- reviewing and merging Packit-created pull requests
- maintaining package quality

> - ensuring updates don't break dependant packages (Packit does not have yet a reverse dependencies check)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ensuring updates don't break dependant packages
```

I wouldn't mention that, even if Packit already did rebuild dependent packages automatically, it would still be the maintainer's responsibility to verify the results.

:::tip `version_update_mask`

> The default Packit onboarding configuration enables automated releases only for `rawhide`. 

Reviewer 2: maybe worth linking `packit dist-git init` here

When extending automation to branched Fedoras and EPELs, consider using [`version_update_mask`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration#version_update_mask) to prevent breaking changes in stable Fedora versions.

:::

:::warning Packit pull requests can spam other maintainers

SPam -> ask more about the spam

:::

:::warning missing notifications

> Packit bot user creates pull requests, Koji builds, and Bodhi updates, making it the default notification recipient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pull requests, Koji builds and Bodhi updates are created by Packit FAS account, making it the default notification recipient.
```

> To receive pull request comment notifications, configure notification settings accordingly.

Reviewer 3: How? Can we create/link a guide or at least the place to set it up? ([notifications.fedoraproject.org](https://notifications.fedoraproject.org/)?)

There is an [open issue](https://github.com/packit/packit-service/issues/2404) for Bodhi update notifications.

:::

## Monitoring and observability

Track *Packit Service* activity through:
- the pull request updates and 
- the [Packit Dashboard](https://dashboard.packit.dev/).

> Packit Service responds with 👀 for every valid command in pull requests. Missing eyes indicate:

Reviewer 3: This is about downstream automation and in Pagure PRs Packit reacts with comments, not emojis.

Author: Oh right, I will fix the sentence.

- Incorrect command syntax
- Packit Service outage

Check service status at [https://status.packit.dev/](https://status.packit.dev/).

## Recovery procedures

### Service-based retriggering

Each job configured in `packit.yml` can be retriggered via dist-git pull request comments. See the [complete list of commands](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding#retriggering).

### Manual CLI Operations

During service outages, maintain workflow using Packit CLI:

1. Install [Packit CLI](https://packit.dev/docs/cli)
2. [Configure required tokens](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration#user-configuration-file)
3. Verify setup:
   - Follow [dist-git onboarding guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/dist-git-onboarding)

>    - Validate config with `packit validate-config`

Reviewer 3: If this is about service outages, I would expect users to already have working config.
What would be nice to document (or perhaps fix) are config differences between service and CLI. For example, a config without `downstream_package_name` works just fine with service but doesn't work with CLI.

Author: > If this is about service outages, I would expect users to already have working config. 

Yes, agreed, but I think this is however worth mentioning for a new user.

> What would be nice to document (or perhaps fix) are config differences between service and CLI. For example, a config without `downstream_package_name` works just fine with service but doesn't work with CLI.

I am not aware of any difference 😅 but sure that would be useful. And I would create a page just for them if we can collect all the differences. Not sure if they do fit in this, I would say more generic, guide.

Reviewer 3: > I am not aware of any difference 😅 but sure that would be useful. And I would create a page just for them if we can collect all the differences. Not sure if they do fit in this, I would say more generic, guide.

I think ideally there should be no differences and we should fix those that exist, rather than documenting them. It surprised me too, I hit it a couple of times, people tend to leave `downstream_package_name` out as it works for them in service but then you try to reproduce their issue locally and it will traceback with a cryptic error.
There is one more thing I know of that works only in service, and that's job-level actions. But that's probably not fixable.

#### Troubleshooting Common Issues

**Missing pull request for release:**

Use [`packit pull_from_upstream`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/pull-from-upstream) when [release-monitoring](https://release-monitoring.org/) detects updates but pull requests aren't created.

**Missing Koji build:**

The release pull request is merged (and contains a change in the version value) but a Koji build isn't triggered.

- Check [`allowed_pr_authors`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/koji_build#optional-parameters)
- Trigger build manually with [`packit build in-koji`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/build/in-koji)

When using Packit CLI to create pull requests, ensure your FAS account is added to the `allowed_pr_authors` list to trigger Koji builds automatically. This enables the expected build workflow for maintainer-created pull requests.

**Missing Bodhi update:**

The Koji build is created but there is no Bodhi update.

- Packit does not create Bodhi updates for `rawhide`, they are automatically created by Bodhi.
- Verify [`allowed_builders`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/bodhi_update#optional-parameters)

> - Create manually using [`packit create-update`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/create-update)

Reviewer 3: Why are CLI commands suggested before checking the dashboard for erros and retriggering (that's not even mentioned)?

Author: Mmmm both checking the dashboard and retriggering are above the CLI usage 🤔 not sure if I follow.

Reviewer 3: Oh, sorry, I didn't realize that `Troubleshooting Common Issues` is a CLI subsection.

- Packit does not create Bodhi updates for `rawhide`, they are automatically created by Bodhi.
- Verify [`allowed_builders`](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/downstream/bodhi_update#optional-parameters)
- Create manually using [`packit create-update`](https://packit.dev/docs/cli/create-update)

For updates on non-rawhide branches, verify your FAS account is included in the `allowed_builders` list. When submitting Koji builds via Packit CLI, automatic Bodhi update creation requires your FAS account to be explicitly authorized in this configuration.

## Customization options

Packit should work out of the box with the simple package structures (e.g. non-complex spec files), but can be customised for more complicated use cases as well.

- [Actions/hooks](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/actions)
- Reference [configuration examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#examples-for-actions)

### Changelogs

> Customize changelog generation [following these examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#custom-changelog-generation)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Customize changelog generation following [these examples](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/examples#custom-changelog-generation)
```

### Sidetags - releasing multiple packages in a single update

> [Follow this guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/releasing-multiple-packages) to enable builds in sidetags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow [this guide](https://packit.dev/docs/fedora-releases-guide/releasing-multiple-packages) to enable builds in sidetags.
```

## Ecosystem Awareness

Before adoption, review similar packages in the same ecosystem for best practices and configuration patterns.

> Find real life examples using *sourcegraph.com*: [follow this example query](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+file:%5Epackit%5C.yaml%24+&patternType=keyword&sm=0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Find real life examples using *sourcegraph.com*: follow [this example query](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context:global+file:%5Epackit%5C.yaml%24+&patternType=keyword&sm=0).
```
